•
NARFWINSBIGVICTORYASFEDERAL
COURTALLOWSPEMBINA CHIPPEWA
DAMAGES CLAIMSTOGOFORWARD
IndianLawLibrary page14CALLING TRIBESTOACTION!
.................................................. page13-DraftDeclaration onIndigenous
Peoples page11UnitedStatestogetthecasedismissed or
substantially reduced.Itallowsthecasetogo
forwardtodetermine whether theUnitedStates
breached itstrustresponsibilities tothe
Pembina Chippewas withrespecttotheirtrust
funds,andtodetermine an
amount ofdamages for
whichtheUnitedStatesis
liableforthosebreaches.
ThePembina Chippewas'
$53million judgment
awardisthesecondlargest
Indianjudgment award
ThePembina Chippewas'
trustfundisnotsmall.In
1991astheU.S.Department
oftheInterior's Bureau
ofIndianAffairsentered
intoacontract withthe
accounting firmofArthur
Andersen to"reconcile" all
1500tribaltrustfundsheld
bytheUnitedStates,the
Pembina Chippewa trust
fundwaslistedasthe"secondlargest"judgment
fundbeingmanaged bytheUnitedStatesatthat
time. Thetotalawards tothePembina
Chippewas bytheIndianClaimsCommission
(ICC)-in1964and1980-wereabout$53million.
OnlytheICCawardstotheLakota(Sioux)
Nationsofabout$200millionexceeded thoseof
thePembina Chippewas. ~CASEUPDATES
-KlamathBasin
Adjudication page10~NARFWinsBigVictoryasFederalCourt
AllowsPembinaChippewa Damages
ClaimstoGoForward page1
~NewBoardMembers page12
~
~.In1863and1892,plaintiffs' ancestors ceded
landstotalingsome20millionacrestothe
UnitedStates.TheIndianClaimsCommission
andthiscourtawardedcompensation forthose
lands.Thecompensation awarded wasthen
heldintrustbytheUnited
States. Thissuitseeks
damages formismanage­
mentbytheUnitedStates
ofthefundsitheldin
trust.
SobeginstheOpinionof
theU.S.CourtofFederal
Claimsinitsopiniondated
January 26,2006,inthe
caseChippewa CreeTribe
oftheRocky Boy's
Reservation, LittleShell
TribeofChippewa Indians
ofMontana, Turtle
Mountain Bandof
Chippewa Indians, and
theWhiteEarthBand
ofMinnesota Chippewa
Indians, etal.v.United
States.
TheCourt'sfifty-five (55)pageOpInIOn isa
stunning victoryforthesefourtribes,whoalso
areknownasthe"Pembina Chippewa Tribes."It
comesalmostfourteen yearsafterthecasewas
filedbytheNativeAmerican RightsFund
(NARF)onbehalfofthePembina Chippewa
Tribes.Itrejectsfourmajorarguments bythe•
VOLUME31,NO.1 WINTER/SPRING 2006WhiletheLakotaJudgment Fundshaveyetto
bedistributed, thegovernment hasmadeseveral
distributions ofthePembina Chippewas' judg­
mentfund.In1984,1988,1990,and1994,large
amounts ofthefundwere,attherequestofthe
Pembina Chippewa Tribes'leadersandwith
congressional approval, distributed intheform
ofone-time "percapitapayments" tomembers
andnon-members oftheTribeseligible to
receivesuchpayments underthecongressional
Pembina Distribution Actsof1971and1982.
Thepercapitapayments rangedfrom$44.00to
$1400.00. Inaddition, underthe1982
Distribution Act,andalsoattherequestofthe
triballeaders, twentypercent (20%)ofeach
tribe'sshareisheldbytheUnitedStatesintrust
fortribaleconomic andsocialprograms. The
tribesareallowedtoreceiveapproved program
fundsfromtheinterestearnedontheir20%
shares.
Thefilingofthiscasein1992
But,particularly in1988,atthetimeofoneof
thepercapitadistributions, thetriballeadersof
theTurtleMountain BandofChippewa Indians
weredismayed attheoveralllackofmoney
available fordistribution. TheTribesoughtan
auditofthePembina Judgment Fund(PJF)from
theInteriorDepartment's OfficeoftheInspector
General. TheTribealsohiredindependent
accountants whoconfirmed totheTribethaton
thisissue,"youdon'tneedanaccounting firm,
youneedalawfirm."TheTriberetained NARF
tofileabreachoftrustlawsuitoverthegovern­
ment'sfiduciary management -accounting and
investment -ofthePJFfromtheinception of
thePembina Awardsin1964tothepresent.
Acaseformoneydamages wasfiledintheU.S.
CourtofFederalClaimsinSeptember 1992.
Itwasfiledasaclassactiononbehalfof"all
beneficiaries tothePJF."
TheUnitedStates'effortstoreconcile tribal
trustfunds
Formanyyearsafteritwasfiled,thecasewas
stayeduponagreement ofthepartiesandwith
theCourt'sapproval toallowthecompletion oftheArthurAndersen tribaltrustfundreconcili­
ationproject.Intheearly1980s,criticalreports
bytheU.S.GeneralAccounting Officeandthe
Interior Department's OfficeoftheInspector
General documented majorproblems inthe
UnitedStates'fiduciary management oftribal
trustfunds.By1987Congress hadmandated an
auditandreconciliation ofthetribes'funds­
whichhadneverbeendoneeventhoughsomeof
thefundsdatebacktotreatiesoftheearly1800s.
AndyettheUnitedStateswasrequired tohold
thesefundsintrustfortribesunderitsown
federallaw.
Eventually, theBureau ofIndianAffairs
admitted thatitwasincapable ofconducting an
auditandreconciliation itself,andsoitbidout
theproject.ThecontractwasawardedtoArthur
Andersen, andattheendcostthegovernment
$21million dollars. ButArthurAndersen
admittedly wasunabletoperform ahistorical
accounting, astandard audit,orevenafullrec­
onciliation ofthetribaltrustfunds-largelydue
topoorornon-existent recordkeepingonthe
partofthegovernment. Instead, Arthur
Andersen performed averylimitedreconciliation••ontribaltrustfundsforthetimeperiod1972to
1992.Thislimitedreconciliation projectresulted
inreportstotribesin1996.
Afterstudying theirArthurAndersen reports,
inJuly1997,attheCourt'srequest,thePembina
Chippewa Tribesfiledtheirresponse tothe
reports. TheTribeswereadamant thatthe
ArthurAndersen reportsdidnotresolveanyof
theirclaimsinthiscase,andinfactthereports
supported theTribes'claimsofmisaccounting
andmismanagement ofthePJF.InNovember
1997,thegovernment repliedthatitwaswilling
toentertain proposals fromtheTribesin
anefforttoresolvethiscasebymeansofa
negotiated settlement.
Effortstoresolvethiscasebymeansof
negotiated settlement
Forthenextseveralyears,thecaseagainwas
stayedbytheagreement ofthepartiesandwith
theCourt'sapproval. Duringthistimeperiod,
thepartiesworkedtogether toidentify, locate,
andcollectthedocuments pertaining tothePJF.
FortheArthurAndersen reconciliation period,
muchoftheinformation hadbeencollected.
Still,theprocesswasarduous. "IfyouorIgoto
aprivatebankortrusteeandaskforouraccount
records, wewillgetthemwithinareasonable
time,"saysMelodyMcCoy,whohasservedas
NARF's leadattorney onthiscasesince
September 1996."Thatisnotthesituation where
thefederalgovernment isyourtrustee," she
cautions. "Ittakesthegovernment aboutfive
yearstoproduce alloftherecordsforatribal
trustfund.Therecordsareinvariousstorage
facilities literallyacrossthecountry-fromSan
Francisco toAlbuquerque toDenvertoKansasto
ChicagotoVirginia. Untilrecentlytheywerenot
sortedorindexedbytribeorbyaccount. The
government isundertaking thateffortonlynow,
inlightofrepeated mandates ofCongress and
lawsuitslikethatofthePembina Chippewas. And
attheendofthedayyou'llneverknowwhether
you'vegottenallofyourtrustrecords.You'lljust
neverknow."
ButNARFnevertheless persisted onbehalfof
thePembina Chippewas' claims.Accounting andinvestment expertswerehiredtopiecetogether
whatevidence therewasofthegovernment's
accounting andmanagement ofthePJF.By
August2000,theexpertshadprepared andthe
Tribeshadapproved areporttothegovernment
ontheirviewofthegovernment's accounting of
thePJFfrom1964toSeptember 1992,theendof
theArthurAndersen reconciliation project.The
Tribes'reportshowedthat,basedonthedocu­
mentsprovidedtotheTribestodate,forthistime
periodtherewereover11,000transactions inthe
PJFaccounts. About10,000oftheseappeared to
beinvestment transactions, andabout1000
ofthemappeared tobenon-investment transac­
tions.Ofthe1000non-investment transactions,
atleast250,(onequarteror25%)werelacking
sufficient documentation orvalidityunderthe
criteriagoverning suchtransactions assetforth
inthegovernment's owntribaltrustfund
accounting andmanagement manuals. These
questionable non-investment transactions
totaledover$63million.
Overthenextseveralyears,manyin-person
meetings wereheldtodiscussthe250non­
investment transactions. ByMarch2003the
~government hadproduced sufficient documenta­
tionofthevalidityofmanyofthequestioned
transactions thatthepartieswereinagreement at
leastforpurposes ofanegotiated settlement on
allofthenon-investment transactions forthe
1964Pembina Award(whichreflected theICC
compensation forlandscededbytheTreatyof
1863thataretodaylocatedinwesternMinnesota
andeasternNorthDakota)upthroughthetime
ofthepercapitadistribution ofthisAwardthat
beganin1984.Andthepartiesgenerally werein
agreement aboutthedates,timing,andamounts
ofabouteightypercent(80%)ofthenon-invest­
menttransactions forthe1980Pembina Award
(whichreflected theICCcompensation forlands
cededbyanAgreement of1892thataretoday
locatedinnorthern NorthDakota), upthrough
thetimeofamajorpercapitadistribution ofthat
Awardthatbeganin1988.
TheUnitedStatesgoesbacktocourttotryto
getthecasedismissed
Thepartiesthenagreedtoturntheirattention
totheclaimsthatthePJFhadbeenunderinvested
bythegovernment. InJanuary2004theTribes'
submitted totheUnitedStatesa"PartialPreliminary ReportonEstimate ofDamages" that
showedthegapinhowthePJFfundswere
actuaJlyinvestedcompared tohowintheTribes'
viewtheyshouldhavebeeninvested hadthe
trusteeproperly andfullymanaged thePJE
ItwasaroundthistimethattheUnitedStates
returned toCourtandsoughttogetthiscase
eitherdismissed orsubstantially limited.
TheCourtsetaschedule forbriefing bythe
partiesontheissuesthattheUnitedStateswas
raising. Essentially, theUnitedStateswas
makingfourarguments: 1)thatthePJFfunds
werenotasamatteroflawheldintrustbythe
government; 2)thatCongress hasnotcreatedany
fiduciary dutiesonthepartofthegovernment to
managethePJFsuchthatthegovernment canbe
heldliableincourtformoneydamages for
breaches oftrust;3)thattheclaimsinthiscase
wereuntimely -thatis,theywerebrought to
courttoolate;and,4)thatclasscertification
shouldbedenied,largelybecauseofalackof
commonality amongtheproposed classofallPJF
beneficiaries.
TheCourtrejectsallofthegovernment's
dismissal arguments
Thebriefingontheseissueswascompleted in
October2005.OnOctober25,2005,theCourt
heardoralargument foroverthreehoursbythe
attorneys inWashington, DContheseissues.On
January26,2006,theCourtissueditsopinionon
theissues.TheCourtruledagainsttheUnited
StatesandforthePembina Chippewas onallof
theissues.
TheCourtfirstheldthatasamatteroflawthe
PJFwasheldbytheUnitedStatesintrustfrom
thetimeoftheappropriations oftheawardsby
Congress in1964and1980.TheCourtfound
sufficient evidence ofthetruststatusofthePJF
AwardsfromthePermanent Appropriations
RepealActof1934,31U.S.C.Sec.1321(a)(67)
(whichclassifies judgment fundssuchasthePJF
as"tribaltrustfunds");theclassification bythe
U.S.Treasury Department ofthePJFAwardsas
trustaccounts; and,theOfficeofManagement
andBudget's Interpretation ofthetrust
obligations withrespecttoIndiantrustfunds.•
••
•Further, theCourtfoundnothing inthePJF
Appropriations orDistributions Actsthatnegated
thetrustcharacter ofthePJFAwards.
TheCourtalsoheldthatCongress hascreated
statutory dutiesonthepartoftheUnitedStates
toinvestthePJFAwards,andtheCourtcanhear
andresolveclaimsformoneydamages ofalleged
breaches ofthesetrustduties.NARFarguedthat
thestatutory dutiesareinthegeneraltribaltrust
fundinvestment statutes, 25U.S.C.Sees.161a
and162a.TheUnitedStatesarguedthatthese
lawsmerelyauthorize (asopposedtorequire)the
government toinvestthefunds.TheCourt
agreedwithNARFandheldthatinthetribaltrust
fundstatutes,Congress createdspecificfiduciary
dutiesonthepartofgovernment agenciesforthe
"productive investment oftrustfunds"suchas
thePJF.AndtheCourtfoundthata"breachof
thosefiduciary dutiesgivesrisetoaTuckerAct
claimfordamages."
TheUnitedStatesmadeseveralarguments that
someormostoftheclaimsinthiscaseare
untimely underthesix-yearstatuteoflimitations
thatgovernsgenerally claimsagainsttheUnited
States.Forexample, theUnitedStatesargued
thatclaimsregarding the1964PJFAward,which
waslargelydistributed in1984,shouldhavebeen
broughtwithinsixyearsofthedistribution rather
thanin1992.NARFpointedout,however, that
Congress, inaseriesoflawsbeginning in1990
hasclarifiedthatclaimsagainsttheUnitedStates
astrusteefortribaltrustfundsdonotaccrue
untiltheUnitedStatesprovidesthebeneficiaries
withanaccounting "fromwhichthebeneficiary
candetermine whether therehasbeenaloss."
NARFfurtherarguedthatnosuchaccounting
hadbeenprovided regarding the1964Awardor
the1980Award.
TheCourtagreedwithNARFandheldthatall
claimsforbreachoftrustinthiscasewithregard
toboththe1964and1980Awardsaretimelyand
properlybeforetheCourt.TheCourtagreedwith
NARFthatannualandmonthly accountstate­
mentsgenerated bythegovernment inthe1980s
werenotanaccounting fromwhichlossescould
bedetermined. TheCourtalsoheldthatthePJF
percapitadistributions in1984and1994wereinsufficient toconstitute therequisiteaccounting.
TheCourtalsorejected theUnitedStates'
argument thatbecauseitdidthedistributions it
neednotprovideanaccounting.
Thecourtunderstands thegovernment to
bearguingthatatrusteecanavoidliabilityfor
malfeasance byhanding backwhatever is
thenheldintrustandwalkingaway.Thisis
notthelaw...Defendant's attempttoavoid
liabilitybyarguingthatitsdutytotrustfund
beneficiaries terminated withthedistribution
ofthefundsisunavailing.
Asnotedabove,theplaintiffTribesthatfiled
thiscaseintended itfromitsinception tobea
classactiononbehalfofallPJFbeneficiaries. The
UnitedStatesarguedvehemently againstclass
certification. Intheend,theCourtagreedwith
NARFthatthecasemettherequirements for
classcertification. TheCourt,however, wasof
theviewthatthereisanotherandperhapsbetter
meansbywhichthiscasecanproceed-under28
U.S.C.Sec.1505asaclaimagainsttheUnited
Statesbrought byan"identifiable groupof
American Indians."
Onthispoint,theCourtnotedthatthePJF
beneficiaries alreadyhavebeenrecognized asan
"identifiable groupofAmerican Indians" under
28U.S.C.Sec.1505,byboththeICCinthe
proceedings thatledtothePJFAwardsand
Congress.
Thegroupofbeneficiaries ofthe1964and
1980Awards,asdefinedinthe1971and1982
Distribution Acts,including theirheirs,
descendants, andsuccessors-in-interest, are
an"identifiable group."Thecourtfindsthat
the"beneficiaries ofthePembina Judgment
Fund...arean'identifiable groupofAmerican
Indians'underthetermsof28U.S.C.Sec.
1505andwereentitledtobringsuitagainst
thegovernment atthetimetheComplaint
wasfiled.
TheCourtfurtherwasoftheviewthatrecog­
nizingthebeneficiaries ofthe1964and1980TheVotingRightsActandAlaska
theimpactoftheVRAinAlaskaoverthepast40
years,including whether statevotingpractices
orprocedures discriminate againstminority
voters,orhowwellthestateiscomplying with
theminority language assistance provisions.
"Rural"Alaskaisatermofart,qualitatively
distinctfromruralNebraska orruralMontana.
Asthestatewiththelargestlandareaandwith
thelowestpopulation densityofanystateinthe
UnitedStates,ruralAlaskaincludes nearly200
Nativevillagesandcommunities thatarenot
accessible byroad.Theyareonlyaccessible by
smallpropeller plane.Thefewerthan300Alaska
Nativeswhoresideineachofthesevillagesstill
practicetheirtraditional wayoflife-livingoff
thelandthrough subsistence fishing,hunting
andgathering. AlaskaNativesarebyfarthe
largestminority population inAlaska,currently
making up19percent ofthetotalstate
population, withnumbers growing inboth
urbanandruralAlaska.Despitecertaingains,
AlaskaNativesarestillthelargest group ofthe
totalAlaskanpopulation toliveinpoverty,with
thehighestunemployment andthelowestlevel
ofeducation.
VotinginruralAlaskacanbeaverydifferent
experience thanvotingelsewhere inthecountry.
Votingcaninvolvecrossing ariver,orasking
your grandchildren totranslate foryouand
explainwhatisontheballot.Oneexample is
Kasigluk, aYup'ikvillagefifteenminutes from
Bethelbyair.There,thelocalelectionofficial
~TheNativeAmerican Rights Fund,in
conjunction withtheNational Congress of
American Indians, isworkingwithacoalition of
civilrightsorganizations underthedirection of
theLeadership Conference onCivilRights
(LCCR)toensurethatCongress reauthorizes
certainremedial provisions withintheVoting
RightsAct(VRA)thatarescheduled toexpirein
2007.Inpreparation forupcoming legislative
hearings, NARFprepared testimony and
authored acomprehensive reportthatwas
submitted tomembers ofCongress. Thisreport,
thefirstofitskind,detailsAlaska'sexperience
undertheVRAandconcludes, rathersurprisingly,
notonlythatAlaskashouldcontinue tobecov­
eredundertheVRAbutalsothatAlaskahas
nevercomplied withthecurrentmandate under
theVRAwithrespecttoAlaskaNatives. The
following istheexecutive summary tothereport,
whichwasauthored byNatalieLandreth ofthe
Alaskaoffice,RichardGuestoftheDCoffice,and
BoaltHalllawstudentMoiraSmith.
GeneralReportFindings
The1965VotingRightsAct(VRA)isarguably
oneofthemostimportant piecesoflegislation
everadopted byCongress. ThestateofAlaska,
whichhasthesinglelargest indigenous
population intheUnitedStates,iscoveredby
section 5(thepreclearance provision) and
sections 4(f)4and203(thelanguage assistance
provisions) oftheVRA.Yet,littleisknownabout•••
•
•heard)applicable undertheU.S.Constitution.
NARFispresently intheprocessofopposing
theUnitedStates'MotionforReconsideration.
NARFbelieves thatgroupplaintiffs inIndian
breachoftrustcasesagainstthegovernment
expressly havebeenprovided forbyCongress in
theICCActandin28U.S.C.Sec.1505,which
clarifiestheCourtofFederalClaims'jurisdiction
oversuchclaims.ArulingbytheCourtonthe
UnitedStates'MotionforReconsideration is
expected laterthisyear.
Italsoislikelythatthegovernment willtryto
bringatleastafewmoreissuestotheCourt
beforeitseriously considers settlement ofthe
case.Nevertheless, afteroverthirteenyearsof
representing thePembina Chippewas inthiscase,
NARFisextremely pleasedwiththeCourt's
January26,2006Opinionwhichallowsthecase
togoforwardasitoriginally wasfiled-formoney
damages onbehalfofallofthebeneficiaries tothe
PJF1964and1980Awards. Assuming thatthe
UnitedStates'MotionforReconsideration is
denied,NARFwillhavehelpedthePembina
Chippewa Tribesclearmanypotential hurdles.
NARFwilllookforwardtogettingtothemeritsof
theunderlying issueinthecase-howmuch
moneyshouldtherehavebeeninthePJFto
distribute tothebeneficiaries hadthetrustee
properly andtimelyaccounted forandinvested
thePJF.0Awardsasanidentifiable groupoffersa
number ofadvantages overeitheraclass
actionunderRCFC23orpermissive joirider
underRCFC20.Byrecognizing thegroupof
beneficiaries asasinglegroupplaintiffunder
theoriginal complaint, thepartiesmay
proceedtolitigatetheclaimsbeforethecourt
without delayfornotification toallclass
members ortoallpotential plaintiffs entitled
tojoinder. Asecondadvantage isthatany
amount ofdamages thatmaybeawarded
couldbesharedbyallgroupmembers and
notonlybysuccessful classmembers or
particular beneficiaries joinedasplaintiffs.
Thus,theCourtviewedthesinglegroup
plaintiffapproach asbeingthemostexpedient
andfairapproach inthisaction.
Whatwillhappennext
NARFinitiallywashopefulthatinlightofthis
opinion thatissofavorable tothePembina
Chippewas, meaningful negotiations betweenthe
partiesonthiscasewouldresume. InFebruary
2006theUnitedStatesinformally toldNARFthat
itwasnotlikelytoappealtheCourt'srulingsin
theJanuary26,2006Opinion. Theattorneys for
thepartiesproceeded tocomplywiththeCourt's
directive toproposejointlyaformandmethodof
noticetomembers oftheplaintiffgroup"asshall
servereasonably topublicize thependency ofthis
actionandtheopportunity toparticipate ..."
Noticediscussions quicklystalled,however; when
theUnitedStatesdecidedthatitwasnothappy
withthecaseproceeding inthepostureofa
groupplaintiff.
OnApril10,2006theUnitedStatesfileda
MotionforReconsideration ofaPortionofthe
Court'sOpinion. TheUnitedStatesseeksrecon­
sideration ofoneofthefourissuesonwhichit
lost-thatportionoftheJanuary 26,2006
Opinionthatdeclares"thattheP.JFbeneficiaries
areanidentifiable groupunderthe28U.S.C.Sec.
1505forpurposes oflitigating claimsthatthe
UnitedStatesmismanaged PJFmonies..."The
UnitedStatesarguesthatproceeding asagroup
plaintiffinthiscasedoesnotmeetrequirements
ofDueProcess(noticeandanopportunity tobeannounces through aborrowed marineradio
thatanyonewhowantstovotehastocomedown
tothecommunity centerby11:30a.m.At11:30,
shepromptly collectstheelection materials,
packsupthesingleballotmachine, drivesit
downtotheriverbyfour-wheeler andloadsit
ontoaboat(thereisnobridge)tocrossoverto
;theothersideoftherivertotheoldvillagesite
~whereshesetsuptheballotmachine againatthe
:school.Theprincipal thenannounces onthe
'Iradiothatthepollisopen.TheStateDivision of!Elections saysthereareabout150communities
!likeKasigluk.Itisalsoimportant tonotethat
24Nativevillagesdidnotevenhavepolling
placesin2004.
AlaskaNativesnotonlyinhabitaunique
geographical place,theyalsopossessaunique
political statusinthelandscape ofAlaska.
Following theadoption ofthe1971Alaska
NativesClaimsSettlement Act(ANSCA) termi­
natingaboriginal titletolandsinAlaska,three
different typesofNativegroupsororganizations
emerged inco-existence: (1)231federally recog­
nizedIndiantribes;(2)13for-profit Nativecor­
porations; and(3)12regionalnon-profit corpo­
rations.TheseNativegroupsintersect withthe
internal political structure ofAlaska,whichis
dividedinto16boroughs andonelargearea
referredtoastheunorganized borough (anarea
encompassing mostoftheruralNativevillages).
Thosewhoresideinthe16boroughs generally
receivetheirservicesthrough theirorganized
andstate-funded regional governments, while
thosewhoresideintheunorganized borough
mustgenerally relyonthelocalNativevillage
tribalgovernment forservices.
AHistory ofDiscrimination andSection 5
Preclearance
Intheearlyyearsofthetwentieth century,the
burgeoning AlaskaTerritory passedlawslimiting
theabilityofAlaskaNativestobecitizens, to
participate inthepoliticalprocess,andtoenter
certainpublicestablishments. In1924,whenthe
U.S.Congress conferred citizenship on"all
noncitizen Indiansbornwithintheterritorial
limitsoftheUnitedStates," theTerritorial
Legislature responded byenacting aliteracylawthenextyearrequiring that"votersinterritorial
elections beabletoreadandwritetheEnglish
language." Alaska'sConstitution, whichbecame­
operative withtheFormal Declaration of
Statehood onJanuary3,1959,alsoincluded an
Englishliteracyrequirement asaqualification
forvotingwhichwasnotrepealeduntil1970.
DuringWorldWarII,theAleutswereforcibly
relocated fromtheirislandhomelands and
interned inovercrowded "duration villages"with
noelectricity, plumbing, cleanwaterormedical
care.Afterthewar,therewerestillsignsinstores
andrestaurants thatread"NoNativesAllowed"
and"NoDogsorIndians." Thishistoryof
discrimination isindicative ofwhyAlaskaisa
coveredjurisdiction underSection5oftheVRA.
Butcontinuing attempts bythestatetodilute
theAlaskaNativevotespeaktotheneedforreau­
thorization ofSection5oftheVRA.Following
the1990census,thestateadoptedalegislative
redistricting planthatwasharshlycriticized on
thegrounds thatitdilutedNativevotes,disre­
gardedthedifferences between AlaskaNative
groups, andwasprepared insecretunder
theinfluence ofsomequestionable dealings.
Acoalition ofNativeinterests appealed tothe
U.S.Department ofJustice(DOJ)imploring DOJ
nottoprecleartheplanunderSection5ofthe
VRAandidentified someofthediscriminatory
components oftheproposed "anti-Native" plan.
DOJrequested moreinformation andultimately
declared theplanlegallyunenforceable because
ofitsnegative effectsonAlaskaNativevoters.
Thus,throughout theredistricting processand
litigation, theVRAandDOJstoodasthelastlines
ofdefense. Without Section 5preclearance,
retrogressive practices wouldhavebeenimple­
mentedwiththeapproval oftheAlaskacourts.
Asageneralmatter,the2000redistricting
proceeded without significant problems.
However, threeaspectsofthe2000redistricting
arerelevanttotheneedforreauthorization: (1)
compliance withtheVRAwasclearlythedriving
forcebehindseveraloftheState'snewdistricts;
(2)theredistricting boardhiredanationalvoting
rightsexpertwhosereportrevealedthatcertain
areasinAlaskastillhaveraciallypolarized
voting;and(3)inthelitigation following the•
•
I
•••••••',....2000redistricting, theAlaskaSupreme Courtset
forthanewstandard ofdeviation thatwill
requirefuturemonitoring bytheDOJ.
Finally,inboththe2000and2004elections,
thestatemadesignificant changes toits
elections lawsshortlybeforetheelection,
including changing absentee ballotrequire­
ments,acceptable formsofidentification and
pollingplaces.Noneofthesechanges were
"precleared" priortotheelectionandthestate
laterwithdrew someofthesechanges. Whilethe
changeofapollingplacemaynotraisearedflag
inmostjurisdictions, inruralAlaskaitcanhave
asignificant impactontheabilityofNativevoters
togettotherightpoll.Inshort,theSection5
preclearance provision hasresulted insome
important changes inAlaska's districts and
electionlaws.
NativeLanguages andSections 4(f)(4)and203
Language Assistance
Thereare20different languages stillspokenin
Alaska.Thelargestgroupsoflanguage speakers
areInupiaq(morethan3,000speakers), Siberian
Yup'ik(about1,100speakers), andCentralYup'ik
(about10,000speakers). Siberian Yup'ikand
CentralYup'ikareparticularly important here
becausetheyarestilltheprimary language of
manyofthevillagesandthefirstlanguage that
children learnathome.Maintaining andpre­
servingtheselanguages iscritically important to
theNativepopulation becauselanguage expresses
aculture's worldview, andis,according tothe
AlaskaNativeLanguages Center,"thegluethat
stickseverything together."
Thereisandhasalwaysbeenasignificant
disparity ineducational opportunities forAlaska
Natives, resulting inmanyNativelanguage
speakers havinglimitedEnglish proficiency
("LEP").Beginning intheearlyterritorial days,
officialgovernment policyestablished asegre­
gatedschoolsystem,ultimately leadingtoa
boarding schoolpolicythatresultedintheState
ofAlaskanotbuilding highschoolsinrural
villages.Nativestudents hadtotravelhundreds
ofmiles,sometimes outofstate,toobtainahigh
schooleducation. AtthetimetheVRAwas
extended in1975,onlyatotalof2,400AlaskaNativeshadgraduated fromhighschool.Asa
resultoflitigation, educational opportunities
andgraduation rateshaveimproved forAlaska
Native students. Butfurther litigation
hasrevealed thatthestatestilldiscriminates,
providing inadequate funding toruralAlaska
schools.
Although Congress amended theVRAin1975
toremedythediscrimination facedbylanguage
minorities invoting,thereislittleevidence of
compliance withsections4(f)(4)and203bythe
StateofAlaskainthepast30 years. Whilevoter
registration andturnoutappeartoberelatively
highinAlaska,AlaskaNativeturnoutisdifficult
todiscernbecause theStatechooses notto
collectracialdata.
Although therearenoformalbarriers to
registration suchasliteracytests,therearestill
barriers.Alaskacontinues itspracticeofEnglish­
onlyelections, adversely impacting theabilityof
AlaskaNativestoexercise theirrighttovote.
Alaskaonlyprovidesregistration materials printed
inEnglishandmanyAlaskaNativesfindthe
English-only ballotlanguage confusing. Further,
Alaskahasare-registration requirement that
disproportionately affectsAlaskaNatives, who
arethemostmobilesegment ofthepopulation.
Inshort,Alaskaappearstohavenotcomplied
withitsobligations toprovideminority language
assistance toAlaskaNativevoters.Thestate
offersintermittent orallanguage assistance and
nowrittenassistance forAlaskaNatives.While
Alaskaseemstoprovidetranslators uponrequest
inmanyplaces,thisreflectsacommitment to
fulfillitsobligations understatelawtoassist
qualified votersneeding assistance invoting.
Bycontrast, Alaskadoesprovidewrittenelection
materials forthe2percent oftheAlaska
population thatisFilipino.
Thus,Alaskaisarguably outofcompliance
withtheVRAandhasbeensincethemandate
wasimposed onthestate30yearsago.As
Congress contemplates reauthorization ofthe
language provisions, itshouldtakeintoaccount
thisnon-compliance andtheongoing needfor
someassistance demonstrated inthisreport.
AlaskaNativevotersstillexperience whatthe
VRAwasmeanttoeradicate 30yearsago.Owasreached on16preambular paragraphs
and22operative articles. Theareasinwhich
agreement wasnotreachedincludeselfdeter­
mination, andlands,territories andnatural
resources. TheChairoftheWorking Group
draftedcompromise provisions onthoseissues
andsubmitted anentiredocument tothe
HumanRightsCommission, hopingitwould
approvethedraftbeforegoingoutofbusiness.
Thatdidnothappen. TheHuman Rights
Commission wasreplaced byanewentity,the
HumanRightsCouncil(Council). Itisunclear
atthistimehowtheworkonthedeclaration will
behandledbythenewCouncil.
TheOASprocess continues. Theseventh
negotiation sessionwasjustheldinMarch2006.
Thissessionmarkedthecompletion ofaround
ofnegotiations ontheentiredocument. Afew
provisions havebeenadopted, butmostprogress
hasbeeninthenarrowing ofissuestobe
discussed onthenextreadingofthedocument.
Thehopeisthatalldisputescanberesolvedand
adocument agreeduponduringthecourseof
thenextreading.0DraftDeclaration onIndigenous Peoples
TheNativeAmerican RightsFundrepresents
theNational Congress ofAmerican Indiansin
boththeUnitedNationsandtheOrganization of
American Stateswheredraftdeclarations onthe
rightsofIndigenous Peoplesarebeingelaborated.
Thesedocuments seektodevelopinternational
lawsandstandards toprotecttherightsof
indigenous peoplesintheUnitedStatesand
throughout theworld.NativeAmerican tribes
needtobeinvolvedintheseefforts,especially to
lobbytheUnitedStatesontheseissuessinceit
issoinfluential intheworld.WhiletheDraft
Declarations coverabroadrangeofrights,of
centralimportance issolidification ofthestatus
ofindigenous peoplesas"Peoples" possessing
grouprightstolandsandnaturalresources, as
wellastherighttoself-determination under
international law.
TheU.N.Working Grouponthedraftdeclaration
(WGDD) finished itseleventh session on
February 3,2006TheWGDD,aprocessin
whichU.N.members andIndigenous Peoples
participated, worked onthefundamental
premisethatnothingisagreeduntileverything
isagreed.Withthatcaveatinmind,agreementCASEUPDATES
•••
•privatewaterusers,ownstheProjectwaterand
storagerights.
Following amonth-long trial,thousands of
exhibits andhundreds ofpagesinpost-trial
briefs,theAdministrative LawJudge(ALl)
upheldtheTribes'positionthatBORistheproper
holderofProjectwaterandstoragerights,and
thattheprivatewaterusersownnowaterrights
atall.Accordingly, theirclaimsweredenied.
Theopinionstatesthatthewaterusershold
onlycontract rightstotheuseofProjectwater
andnothing more.Giventhevastamountof
litigation resources pouredintoCase003bythe
coalition ofirrigation districts, itislikelythey
willasktheALltoreconsider thedecision
orotherwise appealthedecision atthe
appropriate time.0CASEUPDATES
KlamathBasinAdjudication
NARFrepresents theKlamath Tribesinthe
Klamath BasinAdjudication (KBA).TheKBAisa
generalstreamadjudication commenced bythe
StateofOregontoquantifyallwaterrightsinthe
Klamath RiversysteminSouthern Oregon.The
Klamath Tribes,variousfederalagencies and
hundreds ofprivatewaterusers,andnumerous
irrigation districts filedclaims.Adjudication of
theirclaimsinseveralhundred separatecontest
proceedings hasbeenunderway forthepast
severalyears.
Oneofthelargest,mostcomplex contests is
Case003,whichinvolvesthewaterandstorage
claimsfortheenormous Klamath Irrigation
Project operated bytheU.S.Bureau of
Reclamation (BOR).TheProjectstoreswaterin
UpperKlamath Laketoirrigateabout200,000
acresinOregonandCalifornia thatareservedby
approximately 16irrigation districts, including
twoimportant National WildlifeRefuges. The
KlamathTribeshaveaninterestintheoperations
ofthisvastProject,becauseUpperKlamath Lake
isalsohometoanimportant treatyfisherywhich
includes severalendangered speciesoffish.The
TribeswanttobesurethattheProjectcontinues
tooperateaftertheadjudication inaccordance
withtheFederalGovernment's legalobligations
undertheEndangered SpeciesAct(ESA)andits
Indiantrustobligations, bothofwhichareneeded
toprovideadequate legalprotection forthe
endangered treatyfishery.
InCase003,theirrigation districtsfiledwater
andstorageclaimsfortheProjectthatconflict
withBOR'sclaims,asserting thatprivatewater
usersownallofthewaterandstoragerightsfor
theProject,andBORownsnothingatall.This
position, ifsuccessful, wouldreducefederal
involvement inProjectoperations andtherefore
restrict,ifnoteliminate, theneedtocomplywith
existing federalESAandtribaltrustduties
thatarecurrently imposed uponBOR'sProject
operations. Topreventthestripingawayofexisting
legalprotections foritsfishery,theTribestook
theposition inCase003thatBOR,notthe
1•Keweenaw BayIndianCommunity
•LittleTraverseBayBandofOdawaIndians
•Mashantucket Pequot
•NativeVillageofNunapitchuk (IRA)
•OneidaTribeofIndiansofWisconsin
•SaginawChippewa IndianTribeofMichigan
•SanManuelBandofMissionIndians
•Seminole TribeofFlorida
•WhiteMountain ApaofIndianCountry.Itisanhonortolistthose
TribesandNativeorganizations whohavechosen
tosharetheirgoodfortunes withtheNative
American RightsFundandthethousands of
Indianclientswehaveserved.Thegenerosity of
TribesiscrucialinNARF'sstruggletoensurethe
futureofallNativeAmericans. Weencourage
otherTribestobecome contributors and
partnerswithNARFinfightingforjusticeforour
peopleandinkeepingthevisionofourancestors
alive.Wethankthefollowing tribesandNative
organizations fortheirrecentsupport since
October1,2005:0
•CoeurD'AleneTribe
•ColusaIndianCasino&Bingo
•CoquilleIndianTribe
•DenverIndianFamilyResource Center
•FortMojaveTribe
•GrandTraverseBandofOttawa&Chippewa
Indains
•HoonahIndianAssociation
•HopiTribeCALLINGTRIBESTOACTIONI
Ithasbeenmadeabundantly clearthatnon­
Indianphilanthropy cannolongersustain
NARF'swork.Federalfundsforspecificprojects
arealsobeingreducedatdrasticrates.NARFis
nowfacingseverebudgetshortfalls. Ourability
toprovidelegaladvocacy inawidevarietyof
areassuchasreligious freedom, theSupreme
CourtProject,tribalrecognition, humanrights,
thetrustfundscase,tribalwaterrights,Indian
ChildWelfareAct,andonAlaskasovereignty
issueshasbeencompromised. NARFisnow
turning tothetribestoprovidethiscrucial
fundingtocontinue ourlegaladvocacy onbehalf•
••AndrewJ.Bowers,Jr.,Tribal
Council Representative ofthe
Seminole TribeofFlorida,was
electedtotheNativeAmerican
RightsFundBoardofDirectors
inFebruary 2006.Amember of
theFloridaBarAssociation, Mr.
Bowers servedasAssistant
PublicDefender forthe10th
and19thJudicialCircuitinFloridafrom1990
until2005.Mr.Bowers attended Haskell
Institute, Broward Community College and
received aBachelor ofScience degreein
Criminal JusticefromNovaUniversity inFort
Lauderdale, Florida.HereceivedhisJurisDoctor
Degreein1988fromSt.Thomas University
SchoolofLawinMiami,Florida.Mr.Bowersalso
servedastheManager oftheSeminole Indian
Plazafrom1978until1985.TheNARFBoardof
Directors andstafflookforwardtoworkingwith
Mr.Bowers.OandScotland. Kunani wroteanarticleon
repatriation, "BonebyBone,StonebyStone,
Rebuilding theHawaiian NationintheIllusion
ofReality"whichwaspublished intheSpring
2002Arizona StateLawJournalonCultural
Sovereignty: NativeRightsinthe21stCentury
heldattheArizonaStateUniversity.
KunaniandartistwifeIpo,createdthe'Uhane
NoaFoundation andart-related programs for
Kanakachildrenandadultsthroughgrantsfrom
theStateofHawai'iDepartments ofHawaiian
HomeLands(DHHL)andHealth(DOH)intheir
communities andschoolssince1984.Herounds
outhisexpertise withhisawareness offarming,
fishing,language, videotechnician work,grants
writing,thearts(multi-media contemporary and
traditional visualandperforming), restoration of
cultural sites,suchasPu'u0Mahuka and
rebuilding ofcontemporary burialandsacred
sitesfornaiwikupuna(ancestors) throughthe
OZaNaIwiProject(Lifetothebones).
TheNARFBoardofDirectors andstafflook
forwardtoworkingwithKunaniNihipali.ONewBoardMembers
Kunani Nihipali, Native
Hawaiian, istheVicePresident
andDirector oftheNative
Hawaiian Advisory Council
(dbaKeKia'i),whichworks
toprotect traditional and
customary practices andbuild
economic andpolitical
Independence forHawai'i.
Hehasservedasadirector withthePu'a
Foundation, whichisresponsible fortheredress
tokanakamaolithatresultedfromtheUnited
ChurchofChristapologyfortheircomplicity in
the"overthrow" ofthesovereign nationof
Hawai'i. Asanelecteddelegate oftheAha
Hawai'i'O'iwisince1999,heasserted,"Itisan
opportunity tohaveavoiceinourownprocessto
reestablish Hawai'iasaculturally rejuvenated
Sovereign Nation." From1991to1993,he
servedastheexecutive directorforHuiNa'auao,
asovereignty education awareness project
governed byover40Hawaiian organizations.
Kunani servedasthePo'0(head)ofHui
MaZamaINaKupuna 0Hawai'iNei,agroup
caringfortheancestors ofkapae'clina0Hawai'i
throughrepatriation. HuiMaZama members are
trainedintraditional culturalprotocols relating
tothecareofiwikupuna(ancestors) andmoepu
(sacred burialobjects). HuiMaZama has
conducted reburialceremonies throughout the
Hawaiian islandarchipelago including the
Northwestern islandsofNihoaandMoku
Manamana. Thissixteen-year-old organization is
recognized bytwofederallawsandStatelaw,
including theNational Museum oftheAmerican
IndianActandtheNativeAmerican Graves
Protection andRepatriation Act(NAGPRA), as
havingstanding torepatriate iwikupuna and
moepufromU.S.institutions andhaveconducted
extensive repatriation andreburial efforts
abroad.Basedonculturaltrainingandpractice,
legalstanding, andnational andinternational
efforts,HuiMaZama hasrepatriated over5,732
iwikupunaandmoepufrom31institutions in
theUnitedStates,Canada,Australia, SwitzerlandhasruledthatNARFisnota"private foundation" as
definedinSection509(a)oftheInternalRevenue Code.NARFstrivestoprotectthemostimportant rights
ofIndianpeoplewithinthelimitofavailable
resources. Toachievethisgoal,NARF'sBoardof
Directors definedfivepriorityareasforNARF'swork:
(1)thepreservation oftribalexistence; (2)thepro­
tectionoftribalnaturalresources; (3)thepromotion
ofhumanrights;(4)theaccountability ofgovern­
mentstoNativeAmericans; and(5)thedevelopment
ofIndianlawandeducating thepublicaboutIndian
rights,laws,andissues.Requests forlegalassistance
shouldbeaddressed toNARF'smainofficeat1506
Broadway, Boulder; Colorado 80302.NARF'sclients
areexpected to paywhatever theycantowardthe
costsoflegalrepresentation.
NARF'ssuccesscouldnothavebeenachieved with­
outthefinancial supportthatwehavereceivedfrom
throughout thenation.Yourparticipation makesa
bigdifference inourabilitytocontinue tomeetever­
increasing needsofimpoverished Indiantribes,
groupsandindividuals. Thesupport neededto
sustainournationwide program requires your
continued assistance.
Washington, D.C.Office:
NativeAmerican RightsFund,1712NStreet,NW,
Washington, D.C.20036 (202-785-4166)
(FAX202-8220068)MainOffice:
NativeAmerican RightsFund,1506Broadway,
Boulder, Colorado 80302
(303-447-8760) (FAX303-443-7776)
http://www.narf.org
AlaskaOffice:
NativeAmerican RightsFund,420LStreet,Suite505,
Anchorage, Alaska99501
(907-276-0680) (FAX907-276-2466)TheNARFLegalReviewispublished biannually bythe
NativeAmerican RightsFund.Thirdclasspostagepaid
atBoulder, Colorado. RayRamirez, Editor,
ramirez@narf.org. Thereisnochargeforsubscriptions,
however, contributions areappreciated.TheNativeAmerican RightsFund(NARF)was
founded in1970toaddresstheneedforlegal
assistance onthemajorissuesfacingIndiancountry.
ThecriticalIndianissuesofsurvivalofthetribesand
NativeAmerican peoplearenotnew,butarethe
sameissuesofsurvivalthathavemerelyevolvedover
thecenturies. AsNARFisinitsthirty-sixth yearof
existence, itcanbeacknowledged thatmanyofthe
gainsachieved inIndiancountryoverthoseyearsare
directlyattributable totheeffortsandcommitment
ofthepresentandpastclientsandmembers of
NARF'sBoardandstaff.However, nomatterhow
manygainshavebeenachieved, NARFisstill
addressing thesamebasicissuesthatcausedNARF
tobefoundedoriginally. Sincetheinception ofthis
Nation,therehasbeenasystematic attackontribal
rightsthatcontinues tothisday.Foreveryvictory,a
newchallenge totribalsovereignty arisesfromstate
andlocalgovernments, Congress, orthecourts.
Thecontinuing lackofunderstanding, andinsome
caseslackofrespect,forthesovereign attributes
ofIndiannationshasmadeitnecessary forNARFto
continue fighting.THENATIVEAMERICAN RIGHTSFUND
NARFAnnualReport.ThisisNARF'smajorreporton
itsprograms andactivities. TheAnnual Reportis
distributed tofoundations, majorcontributors, certain
federal andstateagencies, tribalclients, Native
American organizations, andtoothersuponrequest.
RayRamirez, Editor,ramirez@narf.org.
TaxStatus.TheNativeAmerican RightsFundisanon­
profit,charitable organization incorporated in1971under
thelawsoftheDistrictofColumbia. NARFisexemptfrom
federalincometaxundertheprovisions ofSection501C
(3)oftheInternal Revenue Code,andcontributions to
NARFaretaxdeductible. TheInternal Revenue Service••information ispublished, NILLsendsoutbrief
announcements andalinktothenewlyrevised
bulletinpageviae-mail.Sendane-mailtoDavid
Seldenatdselden@narf.org ifyouwouldliketo
subscribe totheIndianLawBulletin service.
Theserviceisfreeofcharge!
SupporttheLibrary: TheNational IndianLaw
Libraryisuniqueinthatitservesthepublicbut
isnotsupported bylocalorfederaltaxrevenue.
NILLisaprojectoftheNativeAmerican Rights
Fundandreliesonprivatecontributions from
peoplelikeyou.Forinformation onhowyoucan
supportthelibraryorbecomeasponsor ofa
specialproject, pleasecontactDavidSelden,
theLawLibrarian at303-447-8760 or
dselden@narf.org. Formoreinformation about
NILL,visit:http://www.narf.org/nill/index.htm
Localpatrons canvisitthelibraryat1522
Broadway, Boulder~ Colorado. 0LibraryServices
Information accessanddelivery: Libraryusers
canaccessthesearchable catalog which
includes bibliographic descriptions ofthe
library holdings bygoingdirectly to:
http://www.narf.orglnill/index.htm orbyaccess­
ingthecatalogthroughtheNational IndianLaw
Library/Catalog linkontheNativeAmerican
RightsFundwebsite atwww.narf.org. Once
relevantmaterials areidentified, librarypatrons
canthenchoosetorequestcopiesorborrow
materials through interlibrary loanfora
nominal fee.
Research assistance: Inadditiontomakingits
catalogandextensive collection available tothe
public,theNational IndianLawLibraryprovides
reference andresearch assistance relating to
Indianlawandtriballaw.Thelibraryoffersfree
assistance aswellascutomized research fora
nominal fee.
KeepupwithchangesinIndianlawwithNILL's
IndianLawBulletins: TheIndianLawBulletins
arepublished byNILLinaneffortkeepNARFand
thepublicinformed aboutIndianlawdevelop­
ments.NILLpublishes timelybulletins covering
newIndianlawcases,U.S.regulatory action,law
reviewarticles, andnewsonitswebsite.
(See:http://www.narf.org/nillibulletins/ilb.htm)
Newbulletins arepublished onaregularbasis,
usuallyeveryweekandolderinformation is
movedtothebulletinarchivepages.WhennewAbouttheLibrary
TheNationalIndianLawLibrary(NILL)located
attheNativeAmerican RightsFundinBoulder,
Colorado isanationalpubliclibraryservingpeople
acrosstheUnitedStates.Overthepastthirty-three
yearsNILLhascollected nearly9,000resource
materials thatrelatetofederalIndianandtribal
law.TheLibrary's holdings includethelargest
collection oftribalcodes,ordinances andconstitu­
tionsintheUnitedStates;legalpleadings from
majorAmerican Indiancases;lawreviewarticles
onIndianlawtopics;handbooks; conference
materials; andgovernment documents.NationalIndianLawLibrary
YourInformation Partner!JohnGonzales, Chairwoman SanIldefonso Pueblo
JaimeBarrientoz, ViceChairman Ottawa/Chippewa
Andrew1.Bowers,Jr... Seminole TribeofFlorida
DeliaCarlyle AkChinIndianCommunity
ElbridgeCoochise Hopi
BillyFrank Nisqually Tribe
JamesRoanGray Osage
KarleneHunter OglalaLakota
KunaniNihipali NativeHawaiian
PaulNinham Wisconsin Oneida
LydiaOlympic YupikJAleut
Anthony Pico ViejasBandofKumeyaay Indians
WoodyWidmark SitkaTribe
Executive Director: JohnE.Echohawk Pawnee
NARFLEGALREVIEW•VOLUME31,NO.1•WINTER/SPRING 2006
NARFLegalReview
1506Broadway
Boulder, CO80302
PRINTED ONRECYCLED PAPER
----------------------~'-'----'--Non-Profit Grg
US.Postage
PAID
Boulder, Colorado
PermitNo..589•
•